Shalate Davhana and Malesela MaubaneIt is often lamented that a hero is not celebrated in his hometown and this might be the case of many anti-apartheid struggle stalwarts, who through their blood and sweat, delivered democracy to South Africa. The month of April ushers in 27 years of political freedom in the country amidst grappling the Covid-19 pandemic.  Even under these circumstances, there is still room to acknowledge the immense sacrifices of these selfless compatriots.As the country will be celebrating Freedom Day on April 27, the role played by various freedom fighters in the attainment of freedom should continue to be a catalyst towards a better life for all. One such hero is Dr Tlou Theophilus Cholo, born 95 years ago in Kgakana village, Ga-Matlala ‘a Thaba area in Limpopo. Upon leaving his hometown for Joburg in the early 1940s, he became one of those who put their lives on the line through his trade union activism and as an uMkhonto we Sizwe (MK) cadre.Cholo also spent 16 years incarcerated at Robben Island prison for his role in the attainment of freedom for the majority of the country’s population, which paved the way to the inaugural democratic elections in 1994.Though Cholo has been a resident of Soshanguve most of his late adult life, a Resurrection Sunday “morning drive” through the hills and valleys this past weekend, retraced his steps to Lennes primary school in the sparsely populated Mmakala village in Ga-Matlala, Limpopo.This is where he received primary schooling, about 100km from Polokwane and Mokopane towns. A service of one of the charismatic churches was in session that morning whilst women were busy cooking for the Lord’s flock in three legged pots through a wood-burning open fire.  The primary school was closed in about 2018, due to low enrolment numbers and kids from Mmakala village now attend school in the nearby Setupulane village.The Matlala area is under the custodianship of Kgoshigadi Mmatlou Matlala and has historic significance as a hotspot for liberation struggle activities.  Heritage sites like a Burial and Commemoration site located on the Bakone Traditional Council kraal in Setumong village and in honour of the late former regent chieftainess, Mme Makwena Matlala, for her struggle against injustice and land dispossession under the apartheid government, and the picturesque Mogoshi mountain situated on the south of Ga-Selolo village, are some of the touch points presenting limitless tourism potential for the area.  Mme Matlala was banished to Pretoria in 1950, then King William’s Town a year later.Local resident, Kgothatso Masekela (23), one of the people found in the school yard, was open for a chat.  Significantly, she is a former learner of the school (2003-2009) whilst indicating that her maternal great grand-aunt is married into the Cholo family.  “I know and appreciate the role that Ntate Cholo played in the liberation of South Africa.  The naming of a stadium in his honour in Bavaria, Ga-Mathapo is a befitting gesture.”  However, the two boys in her company, who are residents of Monte Christo village, did not seem to know much about Cholo and his alma mater.As one leaves Lennes primary to go to Bavaria, Ga-Mathapo, herds of donkeys and goats graze on the local sports ground, cattle roaming freely on the sandy road which is lined with the breath-taking bush abundant in marula, ‘moretšhe’ or sickle bush and “mooka” or sweet thorn trees.  Most sporting activities were halted due to Covid-19, meanwhile the TT Cholo sports stadium in Ga-Mathapo, named after the struggle stalwart, looks like it will need some “resurrection” post the pandemic.About 300km away is the renowned Soshanguve, one of the biggest townships in the north of Pretoria and where the legendary Dr Cholo resides. This multicultural township is a product of the apartheid government’s Group Areas Act of 1950.  It initially comprised people who were forcibly removed from the fertile Walmansthal farms, later joined by “migrants” from the nearby Mamelodi and Atteridgeville townships.  The township’s name itself, depicts the diversity of the majority of South African cultures being Sotho, Shangaan, Nguni and Venda.Lennes Primary School, Dr Cholo’s alma mater situated in Mmakala village, Ga-Matlala ‘a Thaba area. Picture: Malesela MaubaneWalking down Steve Makena Street in Block K towards Cholo’s house on a hot Sunday afternoon, one can hear bursts of laughter entwined with Elton John’s 1973 famous song Candle In The Wind.  A group of middle-aged men and women are enjoying ale drinks under the corrugated iron carports, used for car wash service across Cholo’s family home.Sitting amongst the group is Pax Makhubedu**, a man seemingly in his late 40s, who is oblivious to the rich legacy that dwells opposite his home!  His knowledge of Cholo is nothing beyond “the whereabouts that he was involved in the anti-apartheid struggle.” The Makhubedus*, along with the Cholos and several other families in Block K were the first inhabitants of Soshanguve in 1974 after they were unwilling to move from Walmansthal. Makhubedu said “I got to know Ntate Cholo much later as we were told that he was in exile and later imprisoned on Robben Island.  I have, however, on one of the many occasions spotted the late Dr Oliver Tambo with an entourage of senior politicians visiting the Cholo’s home.”In 2018 the Tshwane University of Technology (TUT) conferred an honorary doctorate (humanities) on the former trade unionist and struggle stalwart whilst the Presidency awarded him the Order of Luthuli in Silver (2009) for his selfless sacrifice in the struggle against apartheid and exceptional leadership in the trade union movement.  His international footprint resulting from the struggle against apartheid can be traced to the then Unionist of Social Soviet Republic (USSR), China, Tanzania and Botswana among others.Reading through various texts about Ntate Cholo gives one an impression of a man satisfied with his role in the struggle for freedom, especially towards equal access to education for the majority of the country’s population. He and his generation did their part in meaningfully building South Africa for all, it is up to us to safeguard the gains of freedom.It is evident that Cholo’s contribution to a democratic South Africa is one that cannot be confined to sporadic local celebrations. Word that the Dr TT Cholo Foundation and other stakeholders have set plans in motion to meaningfully honour the struggle icon through various legacy projects including an annual lecture, are commendable. The motto for the defunct Lennes primary school, Ntate Cholo’s alma mater, “Tirišano ke maatla” in the Northern Sotho language, can be loosely translated to “there is power in working together” and it rings true in relation to efforts to appropriately honour the struggle icon.Hope is that the series of legacy projects, with the blessings of the stalwart himself, will go a long way in preserving the liberation struggle heritage for the prosperity of future generations.* Davhana is a Tshwane University of Technology (TUT) alumnus and staff member whilst Maubane is a TUT alumnus and the director of Oo Mokgatla Media. They write in their personal capacities.** Not his real name