An open letter to President Cyril Ramaphosa from retired Major-General Sandile SizaniIn January 2020 I wrote to you in your capacity as Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force. The issue was about corruption within the Defence Force and, in particular, within Defence Intelligence, where certain individuals have decided to turn that once professional institution into their own personal “cash cow”.Mr President, I detailed the corruption and looting of state resources in that correspondence. I earnestly thought I would be afforded an audience where I would, in detail, lay bare what was happening in your Defence Force. Unfortunately, Sir, that is still the case. The looting continues simply because of inaction from those in power.Commander in Chief, I reluctantly approached the Commission on State Capture, headed by Deputy Chief Justice Zondo, after realising that nothing is being done. That, too, appears to have been a futile exercise for I have not received any feedback from the commission save for the acknowledgement of having received my submission, after numerous calls to the commission.It may well be that my submission does not suit the narrative, or that the people I’m accusing are the untouchables, the most powerful. What other conclusion should I reach when the Office of the President gives me a cold shoulder; what other conclusion could one possibly reach when a commission established to look into issues of corruption within state institutions totally disregards information provided?Mr President, I made contact with the new DG in the Presidency in October 2020, and she promised to arrange a meeting. I have had no contact. Messages indicate that I have either been blocked or something else was happening.Mr President, the Defence Force has been making news in the print media and social media, for the wrong reasons. People are beginning to view our beloved Defence Force in a negative light simply because a few individuals have decided to tarnish the image of the force. It is sad that nothing seems to stem the tide of corruption.The silence on the part of the powers that be has led to the harassment of some members within Defence Intelligence.What is more disturbing is that criminals are allowed to investigate themselves. What message is being sent to future leaders within that institution; are we saying to them, “it is okay to steal, nothing will happen ... instead you may even rise to be the next Chief Defence Intelligence ... or we may even give you a foreign posting”.Unfortunately Mr President, that is the message being conveyed to the junior officers by failure on the part of the powers that be to act against corruption.I’m pleading with you, Commander in Chief, to act decisively against corruption within the Defence Force. The generals accused of corruption are the same people who do not hesitate to put a corporal on immediate suspension without pay on flimsy allegations. Defence Intelligence needs to be saved and that can be done through your action.I heard Mr Sidney Mufamadi saying during his testimony to the Zondo Commission that they had recommended to you, Sir, that the same treatment given to the SSA should be administered on Defence Intelligence and Crime Intelligence of the SAPS. How I wish that, Mr President.Mr President, you stated on numerous occasions that people must fight corruption whenever it raises its ugly head. Some have done so. Protect them, protect the innocent souls being persecuted at Defence Intelligence. It is not enough, Mr President, to say history will absolve you of your fight against corruption.I cannot wait for history, my Commander in Chief. I plead with you to act. Put Defence Intelligence under Alert Level 5 with immediate effect. Consider Mr Mufamadi’s recommendations on Defence Intelligence. Stop Defence Intelligence from investigating itself.* The views expressed here are not necessarily those of Independent Media.